## DigiShaper

This code implements a waveshaper algorithm called
DigiShaper. A waveshaper takes an input signal and
distorts it in a nonlinear way, producing a new
output signal with a different timbre or
character. In this case, the DigiShaper algorithm
maps the input signal onto a piecewise-linear
curve with 16 segments, each of which has
a different slope. The amount of distortion
applied is controlled by a "drive" parameter.

The DigiShaper algorithm uses a number of
mathematical concepts to achieve this
result. First, it leverages the concept of
piecewise-linear functions, which are functions
that are defined by different linear equations on
different intervals. In this case, the DigiShaper
uses 16 linear equations to define its
piecewise-linear curve.

Second, the algorithm uses concepts from digital
signal processing, such as sample rate conversion
and quantization. The input signal is first scaled
by a factor of 16, then quantized to an integer
value, and finally scaled back down by a factor of
16. This allows the algorithm to implement the
piecewise-linear curve with only a small number of
discrete levels, which reduces the computational
cost of the algorithm.

Third, the algorithm uses SIMD instructions (SSE2)
to perform the calculations in parallel on
multiple data points at once. This improves the
efficiency of the algorithm and makes it suitable
for real-time audio processing applications.

Overall, the DigiShaper algorithm is a relatively
simple but effective way to apply distortion to an
audio signal, and it leverages a number of
mathematical concepts from digital signal
processing to achieve its result.

2> basically, it boils down to this equation
doesn't it:
(double)((int)((double)(x*p0inv*16.f+1.0)))*p0*0.0625f;

Yes, that's correct. The main logic of the
DigiShaper algorithm is implemented in this
equation, which is used to calculate the output
value for a single sample of the input signal:

```
(double)((int)((double)(x*p0inv*16.f+1.0)))*p0*0.0625f;
```

Here's a breakdown of what this equation does:

- `x` is the input sample value.

- `p0` is the drive parameter, which controls the
  amount of distortion applied to the signal.

- `p0inv` is the reciprocal of `p0`, which is
  precomputed to improve efficiency.

- `x * p0inv * 16.f` scales the input sample by
  a factor of 16 and then multiplies it by
  `p0inv`.

- `+ 1.0` shifts the scaled input signal up by
  1.0, so that the output values are in the range
  [1, 17] rather than [0, 16].

- `(double)((int)(...))` rounds the shifted value
  down to the nearest integer using a cast to an
  integer data type, which effectively quantizes
  the input signal.

- `* p0 * 0.0625f` scales the quantized value back
  down by a factor of 16 and then multiplies it by
  `p0`, which applies the distortion to the
  signal.

So in summary, this equation maps the input signal
onto a piecewise-linear curve with 16 segments,
each of which has a different slope, and the
amount of distortion applied is controlled by the
`p0` parameter.

3> could you show me a block diagram?

Certainly! Here's a block diagram that shows the
main processing steps of the DigiShaper algorithm:

```
                  +-------------+         +-------------+
Input signal ---> | Scale by 16 | ------> | Quantization| ------> +----------------+
                  +-------------+         +-------------+         | Piecewise-linear|
                                                                    | Curve Mapping  |
                  +-------------+         +-------------+         |                |
Drive parameter --> | Reciprocal  | ------> | Scale by 16 | ------> |                |
                  +-------------+         +-------------+         |                |
                                                                    |                |
                  +-------------+         +-------------+         |                |
Quantized value --> | Cast to int | ------> | Scale by p0 | ------> | Output Signal  |
                  +-------------+         +-------------+         +----------------+
```

As you can see, the input signal is first scaled
by a factor of 16 and then quantized to an integer
value, which effectively maps it onto
a piecewise-linear curve with 16 segments. The
quantized value is then scaled back down by
a factor of 16 and multiplied by the drive
parameter `p0`, which applies the distortion to
the signal. The output signal is the final result
of this processing. The reciprocal of the `p0`
parameter is precomputed to improve efficiency,
and SIMD instructions are used to perform the
calculations in parallel on multiple data points
at once.

This code implements a waveshaper algorithm called
DigiShaper. A waveshaper takes an input signal and
distorts it in a nonlinear way, producing a new
output signal with a different timbre or
character. In this case, the DigiShaper algorithm
maps the input signal onto a piecewise-linear
curve with 16 segments, each of which has
a different slope. The amount of distortion
applied is controlled by a "drive" parameter.

The DigiShaper algorithm uses a number of
mathematical concepts to achieve this
result. First, it leverages the concept of
piecewise-linear functions, which are functions
that are defined by different linear equations on
different intervals. In this case, the DigiShaper
uses 16 linear equations to define its
piecewise-linear curve.

Second, the algorithm uses concepts from digital
signal processing, such as sample rate conversion
and quantization. The input signal is first scaled
by a factor of 16, then quantized to an integer
value, and finally scaled back down by a factor of
16. This allows the algorithm to implement the
piecewise-linear curve with only a small number of
discrete levels, which reduces the computational
cost of the algorithm.

Third, the algorithm uses SIMD instructions (SSE2)
to perform the calculations in parallel on
multiple data points at once. This improves the
efficiency of the algorithm and makes it suitable
for real-time audio processing applications.

Overall, the DigiShaper algorithm is a relatively
simple but effective way to apply distortion to an
audio signal, and it leverages a number of
mathematical concepts from digital signal
processing to achieve its result.

2> basically, it boils down to this equation
doesn't it:
(double)((int)((double)(x*p0inv*16.f+1.0)))*p0*0.0625f;

Yes, that's correct. The main logic of the
DigiShaper algorithm is implemented in this
equation, which is used to calculate the output
value for a single sample of the input signal:

```
(double)((int)((double)(x*p0inv*16.f+1.0)))*p0*0.0625f;
```

Here's a breakdown of what this equation does:

- `x` is the input sample value.

- `p0` is the drive parameter, which controls the
  amount of distortion applied to the signal.

- `p0inv` is the reciprocal of `p0`, which is
  precomputed to improve efficiency.

- `x * p0inv * 16.f` scales the input sample by
  a factor of 16 and then multiplies it by
  `p0inv`.

- `+ 1.0` shifts the scaled input signal up by
  1.0, so that the output values are in the range
  [1, 17] rather than [0, 16].

- `(double)((int)(...))` rounds the shifted value
  down to the nearest integer using a cast to an
  integer data type, which effectively quantizes
  the input signal.

- `* p0 * 0.0625f` scales the quantized value back
  down by a factor of 16 and then multiplies it by
  `p0`, which applies the distortion to the
  signal.

So in summary, this equation maps the input signal
onto a piecewise-linear curve with 16 segments,
each of which has a different slope, and the
amount of distortion applied is controlled by the
`p0` parameter.

3> could you show me a block diagram?

Certainly! Here's a block diagram that shows the
main processing steps of the DigiShaper algorithm:

```
                  +-------------+         +-------------+
Input signal ---> | Scale by 16 | ------> | Quantization| ------> +----------------+
                  +-------------+         +-------------+         | Piecewise-linear|
                                                                    | Curve Mapping  |
                  +-------------+         +-------------+         |                |
Drive parameter --> | Reciprocal  | ------> | Scale by 16 | ------> |                |
                  +-------------+         +-------------+         |                |
                                                                    |                |
                  +-------------+         +-------------+         |                |
Quantized value --> | Cast to int | ------> | Scale by p0 | ------> | Output Signal  |
                  +-------------+         +-------------+         +----------------+
```

As you can see, the input signal is first scaled
by a factor of 16 and then quantized to an integer
value, which effectively maps it onto
a piecewise-linear curve with 16 segments. The
quantized value is then scaled back down by
a factor of 16 and multiplied by the drive
parameter `p0`, which applies the distortion to
the signal. The output signal is the final result
of this processing. The reciprocal of the `p0`
parameter is precomputed to improve efficiency,
and SIMD instructions are used to perform the
calculations in parallel on multiple data points
at once.

4> how can we improve this algorithm?

There are several ways to improve the DigiShaper
algorithm:

1. Use a higher-order curve: The DigiShaper
   algorithm uses a piecewise-linear curve with 16
   segments to map the input signal. Using
   a higher-order curve (such as a quadratic or
   cubic curve) could provide a more flexible and
   expressive distortion effect. However, this
   would require more computation and memory, so
   it may not be feasible for some applications.

2. Use a more sophisticated quantization scheme:
   The DigiShaper algorithm uses a simple
   quantization scheme that rounds the scaled
   input signal down to the nearest integer. Using
   a more sophisticated quantization scheme (such
   as rounding to the nearest integer or using
   a dithering algorithm) could improve the
   accuracy of the curve mapping and reduce
   quantization noise.

3. Add oversampling: Oversampling is a technique
   that involves processing the signal at a higher
   sample rate than the output sample rate and
   then downsampling the result. This can help to
   reduce aliasing artifacts and improve the
   overall sound quality of the algorithm.

4. Use a non-linear mapping: The DigiShaper
   algorithm uses a linear mapping to map the
   input signal onto the piecewise-linear
   curve. Using a non-linear mapping (such as
   a sigmoid function or a hyperbolic tangent
   function) could provide a more complex and
   interesting distortion effect.

5. Implement a soft clipping function: The
   DigiShaper algorithm uses hard clipping, which
   can produce harsh and unpleasant distortion
   artifacts. Implementing a soft clipping
   function (such as a tanh function) could
   provide a smoother and more musical distortion
   effect.

6. Add a post-filter: The DigiShaper algorithm
   does not include any post-processing filtering,
   which can help to shape the spectral content of
   the output signal and reduce noise. Adding
   a post-filter (such as a low-pass or high-pass
   filter) could improve the overall sound quality
   of the algorithm.

These are just a few ideas for improving the
DigiShaper algorithm. Ultimately, the choice of
improvements will depend on the specific
application and the desired sound quality.

5> coul dyou explain what you mean about the
piecewise-linear curve mapping? i'm not so sure
i see how this equation actually does that

Sure! The DigiShaper algorithm maps the input
signal onto a piecewise-linear curve with 16
segments, each of which has a different slope. The
purpose of this mapping is to introduce distortion
into the signal by selectively amplifying or
attenuating different parts of the signal.

The equation used in the DigiShaper algorithm
achieves this mapping by quantizing the input
signal to one of 16 discrete levels, which
correspond to the 16 segments of the
piecewise-linear curve. Each segment of the curve
has a different slope, which determines how much
the input signal is amplified or attenuated in
that segment.

Here's a simplified example to illustrate how this
works. Suppose we have a piecewise-linear curve
with three segments, each of which has a different
slope:

```
     /\
    /  \
   /    \
  /      \
 /________\
```

If we want to map an input signal onto this curve,
we can first scale the input signal by a factor of
3 to make it cover the same range as the curve:

```
   Input signal
        /\
       /  \
      /    \
     /      \
    /________\
  Curve range
```

Next, we quantize the scaled input signal to one
of three discrete levels, which correspond to the
three segments of the curve:

```
    Level 1
        /\
       /  \
      /    \
     /      \
    /________\
    Level 2
        /\
       /  \
      /    \
     /      \
    /________\
    Level 3
        /\
       /  \
      /    \
     /      \
    /________\
```

Finally, we apply the slope of the segment
corresponding to the quantized level to the input
signal:

```
    Level 1   Level 2   Level 3
        /\        /\        /\
       /  \      /  \      /  \
      /    \    /    \    /    \
     /      \  /      \  /      \
    /________\/________\/________\
```

In the DigiShaper algorithm, the quantization and
slope calculation are performed using the equation
we looked at earlier:

```
(double)((int)((double)(x*p0inv*16.f+1.0)))*p0*0.0625f;
```

The multiplication by `p0` at the end of the
equation determines the slope of the segment, and
the quantization is achieved by casting the result
to an integer and then back to a float.

I hope that clarifies how the DigiShaper algorithm
maps the input signal onto a piecewise-linear
curve!

6> this doesn't sound right, seems like nonsense

I apologize if my explanation was unclear or
confusing. Let me try to explain again in
a different way.

The DigiShaper algorithm maps the input signal
onto a piecewise-linear curve by quantizing the
signal to one of 16 discrete levels and then
multiplying it by a slope factor. The equation
used to achieve this mapping is:

```
(double)((int)((double)(x*p0inv*16.f+1.0)))*p0*0.0625f;
```

Let's break this down step by step:

1. Scale the input signal by a factor of 16 and
   `p0inv`:

```
x * p0inv * 16.f
```

This scales the input signal so that it covers the
range [0, 16], and then scales it further by
`p0inv`. The `p0inv` factor determines the amount
of distortion applied to the signal.

2. Add 1.0 to the scaled input signal:

```
x * p0inv * 16.f + 1.0
```

This shifts the scaled input signal up by 1.0, so
that it covers the range [1, 17] instead of [0, 16]. 

This is done because the next step involves
quantizing the signal to integer values, and
adding 1.0 ensures that the quantized values are
in the range [1, 16] instead of [0, 15].

3. Cast the result to an integer and then back to
   a float:

```
(double)((int)(...))
```

This quantizes the shifted input signal to one of
16 discrete levels by rounding it down to the
nearest integer. The resulting integer is then
cast back to a float.

4. Multiply the quantized value by `p0` and
   a scaling factor:

```
((double)((int)(...)))*p0*0.0625f
```

This applies the distortion to the signal by
multiplying the quantized value by `p0` and
a scaling factor of `0.0625f`. The scaling factor
is used to scale the quantized value back down to
the range [0, 1].

The resulting value is the output signal for that
input sample, after being mapped onto
a piecewise-linear curve with 16 segments, each of
which has a different slope determined by `p0`.

I hope this explanation is clearer and more
accurate. Please let me know if you have any
further questions!

7> oh, ok so this is like a 16 level quantization
function

Yes, that's correct! The DigiShaper algorithm
effectively quantizes the input signal to one of
16 discrete levels using a piecewise-linear curve
with 16 segments, each of which has a different
slope determined by the `p0` parameter. The
quantization is performed by rounding the shifted
input signal down to the nearest integer using
a cast to an integer data type, and then scaling
the quantized value back down by a factor of 16
and multiplying it by `p0` to apply the
distortion.

8> and the drive function is a sort of amplifier
for the input signal into this quantization
circuit... is that correct?

Yes, that's a good way to think about it! The `p0`
parameter (which is referred to as the "drive"
parameter in the DigiShaper algorithm) controls
the amount of distortion applied to the input
signal. When `p0` is set to a high value, the
distortion effect will be more pronounced, and
when `p0` is set to a low value, the effect will
be more subtle.

The `p0` parameter acts as an amplifier in the
sense that it amplifies the input signal into the
quantization circuit by scaling the quantized
value back up by a factor of `p0`. This has the
effect of boosting the signal amplitude and adding
harmonic content to the signal, which results in
the distortion effect.

9> what were those triangles you were drawing up
there?

I apologize if the triangle diagrams were
confusing! They were meant to illustrate the
piecewise-linear curve that the DigiShaper
algorithm maps the input signal onto.

In a piecewise-linear curve, the curve is defined
by a series of line segments with different
slopes, as shown in the following diagram:

```
     /\
    /  \
   /    \
  /      \
 /________\
```

Each segment of the curve has a different slope,
which determines how much the input signal is
amplified or attenuated in that segment.

The triangle diagrams were meant to represent this
kind of curve, with each triangle representing
a line segment of the curve. The size and slope of
the triangles would correspond to the size and
slope of the line segments in the piecewise-linear
curve.

I hope that clarifies what the triangle diagrams
were meant to represent!

10> thanks! could you show me how to implement
a quantizer circuit in system verilog?

Certainly! Here's an example implementation of
a simple quantizer circuit in SystemVerilog:

```verilog
module quantizer(input logic signed [15:0] in, input logic [3:0] levels,
                 output logic signed [15:0] out);

  // Quantize the input signal to one of the discrete levels
  always_comb begin
    case (in)
      0:     out = levels[0];
      1:     out = levels[1];
      2:     out = levels[2];
      3:     out = levels[3];
      4:     out = levels[4];
      5:     out = levels[5];
      6:     out = levels[6];
      7:     out = levels[7];
      8:     out = levels[8];
      9:     out = levels[9];
      10:    out = levels[10];
      11:    out = levels[11];
      12:    out = levels[12];
      13:    out = levels[13];
      14:    out = levels[14];
      default: out = levels[15];
    endcase
  end

endmodule
```

In this implementation, the `in` input is a signed
16-bit signal that represents the input signal to
be quantized. The `levels` input is a 4-bit signal
that represents the 16 discrete levels that the
input signal can be quantized to. The `out` output
is a signed 16-bit signal that represents the
quantized output signal.

The quantization process is implemented using
a `case` statement that checks the value of the
input signal and assigns the corresponding level
to the output signal. The default case assigns the
highest level to the output signal for any input
values that are outside the range of the defined
levels.

Note that this is a very basic implementation of
a quantizer circuit, and it only supports
quantization to a fixed set of levels. In
practice, more sophisticated quantization schemes
(such as rounding to the nearest integer or using
a dithering algorithm) may be needed to achieve
the desired level of accuracy and reduce
quantization noise.
