# surge-adsr

The `AdsrEnvelope` is a symbol in the context of
sound synthesis and represents an envelope
generator that is commonly used to shape the
amplitude of a sound wave over time. "ADSR" stands
for "Attack, Decay, Sustain, Release", which are
the four stages of the envelope.

- The `Attack` stage represents the initial
  increase in amplitude as the sound is triggered
  or initiated.

- The `Decay` stage is a period of decreasing
  amplitude after the initial peak, usually to
  a steady level called the `Sustain` level.

- The `Sustain` stage represents a period of
  steady amplitude that is held as long as the
  sound is being triggered or sustained.

- Finally, the `Release` stage represents the
  period during which the sound's amplitude
  decreases back to zero after the sound is no
  longer being triggered.

The `AdsrEnvelope` is often used in electronic
music synthesis, particularly in creating sounds
for instruments such as synthesizers and
samplers. By controlling the amplitude of the
sound wave with an envelope generator, the sound
can be shaped in a way that creates more dynamic
and interesting musical textures.

3> thanks -- could you teach me more about how
such a system is designed?

Sure! I can provide you with a high-level overview
of how an ADSR envelope generator is typically
implemented in a synthesizer or similar audio
processing system.

First, the envelope generator needs to receive
a trigger signal to indicate when to start
generating the envelope. In the case of
a synthesizer, this trigger signal might be
generated when a key is pressed on the keyboard.

Once the trigger signal is received, the envelope
generator begins the Attack stage, during which
the amplitude of the sound increases from zero to
its peak level. The duration of the Attack stage
is controlled by an attack time parameter, which
determines how quickly the sound reaches its peak
amplitude.

After the Attack stage, the envelope generator
moves into the Decay stage, during which the
amplitude of the sound decreases to a sustain
level. The duration of the Decay stage is
controlled by a decay time parameter, which
determines how quickly the sound reaches the
sustain level.

Once the Decay stage is complete, the envelope
generator enters the Sustain stage, during which
the amplitude of the sound remains constant. The
level of the sustain stage is controlled by
a sustain level parameter, which determines the
amplitude level at which the sound will be
sustained.

Finally, when the trigger signal is released (for
example, when a key is released on the keyboard),
the envelope generator enters the Release stage,
during which the amplitude of the sound decreases
from the sustain level back down to zero. The
duration of the Release stage is controlled by
a release time parameter, which determines how
quickly the sound returns to silence.

The ADSR envelope generator can be implemented
using a variety of techniques, but one common
approach is to use a series of linear or
exponential ramp generators to control the
amplitude of the sound wave over time. These ramp
generators can be implemented using digital signal
processing techniques or analog circuits,
depending on the specific implementation.

4> what are some other techniques for implementing
one?

There are several other techniques for
implementing an ADSR envelope generator, each with
its own advantages and disadvantages. Here are
a few examples:

1. Look-up table: One approach is to use a look-up
   table to store a pre-calculated envelope curve,
   which can be accessed and scaled in real-time
   as needed. This can be an efficient approach,
   but it requires a relatively large amount of
   memory to store the table, and it may not be as
   flexible as other methods.

2. State-variable filter: Another approach is to
   use a state-variable filter to generate the
   envelope shape. This involves using a filter
   circuit to generate a signal that follows the
   desired envelope shape. The advantage of this
   approach is that it can produce complex
   envelope shapes that are difficult to achieve
   with other methods, but it can be
   computationally expensive and may introduce
   unwanted artifacts or distortion.

3. Sample and hold: Another technique is to use
   a sample and hold circuit to generate the
   envelope shape. This involves sampling the
   amplitude of the sound wave at regular
   intervals and holding the value until the next
   sample is taken. The advantage of this approach
   is that it can be relatively simple to
   implement and can produce smooth, continuous
   envelope shapes, but it may not be as precise
   or flexible as other methods.

4. Function generator: A function generator
   circuit can also be used to implement an ADSR
   envelope generator. This involves using
   a circuit that generates a specific waveform
   shape, such as a triangle wave or sawtooth
   wave, to create the envelope shape. This
   approach can be flexible and precise, but it
   may require a relatively complex circuit design
   and can be computationally expensive.

Ultimately, the choice of implementation technique
will depend on the specific requirements of the
application and the resources available for
implementation.

5> how do the analog and digital implementations
differ?

Analog and digital implementations of an ADSR
envelope generator differ in terms of the
underlying circuitry and processing techniques
used. Here are some key differences:

1. Signal Processing: Analog implementations of an
   ADSR envelope generator typically use analog
   circuitry to generate the envelope shape, while
   digital implementations use software algorithms
   to generate the envelope shape. This can affect
   the precision, speed, and complexity of the
   implementation.

2. Control Parameters: In an analog
   implementation, the various control parameters
   of the ADSR envelope generator (attack time,
   decay time, sustain level, release time) are
   usually implemented as adjustable resistors or
   potentiometers. In a digital implementation,
   these parameters are typically controlled using
   software, which allows for more precise and
   flexible control over the envelope shape.

3. Signal Fidelity: Analog implementations of an
   ADSR envelope generator are typically more
   susceptible to noise, distortion, and other
   sources of signal degradation. Digital
   implementations, on the other hand, can provide
   high fidelity and precision in generating the
   envelope shape, as long as the
   digital-to-analog converters used to convert
   the digital signal to an analog audio signal
   are of high quality.

4. Cost and Complexity: Analog implementations of
   an ADSR envelope generator can be relatively
   simple and inexpensive to implement, but may
   require careful tuning and calibration to
   achieve the desired envelope shape. Digital
   implementations can be more complex and costly,
   but can provide greater flexibility and
   precision in generating the envelope shape.

Overall, the choice between an analog or digital
implementation of an ADSR envelope generator will
depend on the specific requirements of the
application, including factors such as cost,
complexity, signal fidelity, and control
parameters. In some cases, a hybrid approach may
be used, combining analog and digital techniques
to achieve the desired envelope shape.
