# surge-traits: Traits and Common Functionality for the Surge Synthesizer System

The `surge-traits` crate provides a collection of
traits, structures, and utilities for the Surge
synthesizer system, designed to streamline its
components and ensure consistent behavior across
different parts of the system.

## Overview

The crate includes various tokens associated with
different aspects of the synthesizer system, such
as oscillators, presets, convolution, effect
management, and more. Some of the key components
are:

- **OscillatorProcessBlockCfg**: This struct is
  responsible for configuring the processing block
  of an oscillator. It includes functionality for
  loading oscillator algorithms, setting
  oscillator parameters, and processing audio
  output.

- **PresetType**: An enumeration representing
  different types of presets in the
  synthesizer. The crate provides methods for
  loading and saving presets, as well as managing
  snapshots of the current state.

- **ConvolutionCfg** and **ConvoluteArgs**: These
  structs provide configuration and arguments for
  convolution operations, which are fundamental
  for implementing various audio effects such as
  reverb and convolution-based wavetable
  synthesis.

- **MaybeEffect** and **MaybeEffects**: These
  traits define a common interface for audio
  effects in the synthesizer, including methods
  for initialization, buffer management,
  processing, and parameter control.

- **Ringout**: A collection of methods and
  structures related to managing the ringout
  process in the synthesizer, which is responsible
  for gradually decreasing the output level of
  a sound until it becomes inaudible. This is
  particularly important for managing polyphony
  and CPU usage in the synthesizer.

- **Attack**, **Release**, and related traits:
  These traits define common behavior for the
  attack and release stages of envelopes in the
  synthesizer, including enabling/disabling
  envelopes, setting bipolar/unipolar modes, and
  processing audio blocks.

- **UpdateDisplay**: A trait that provides methods
  for updating the display of a synthesizer
  component, including loading coefficients,
  plotting magnitude responses, and managing the
  block size and sample rate.

The mathematical ideas and equations associated
with these tokens are primarily related to digital
signal processing (DSP) algorithms used in audio
synthesis, such as convolution, wavetable
synthesis, and envelope processing. While specific
equations may vary depending on the
implementation, the crate provides a foundation
for working with these concepts in a consistent
and efficient manner.

In summary, the `surge-traits` crate provides
a collection of traits, structures, and utilities
that streamline the implementation of the Surge
synthesizer system, ensuring consistent behavior
across its components and facilitating the
development of new features and enhancements.

12> could we look at more of the traits? please
list the trait name and a brief description for as
many as you can

Here is a list of some traits found in the
`surge-traits` crate, along with a brief
description for each:

1. **Init**: This trait provides a method called
   `init` for initializing the implementing
   struct. It is typically used to set initial
   values for struct members or allocate
   resources.

2. **NTables**: This trait defines a method
   `ntables` which returns the number of waveshape
   tables used in the synthesizer. It helps manage
   the number of waveshapers needed for different
   components.

3. **LookupWaveshape**: This trait provides
   a method `lookup_waveshape` which takes an
   entry index and a value, then returns a value
   from the waveshape table. It is useful for
   wavetable synthesis and processing.

4. **LookupWaveshapeWarp**: Similar to
   `LookupWaveshape`, this trait provides a method
   `lookup_waveshape_warp` which takes an entry
   index and a value, then returns a value from
   the waveshape table with a warp applied. This
   is useful for implementing different
   waveshaping algorithms.

5. **ClearBuffers**: This trait provides a method
   `clear_buffers` for clearing the internal
   buffers of an audio processing component. It is
   useful for resetting the state of a component,
   such as when stopping playback or changing
   parameters.

6. **Reset**: This trait provides a method `reset`
   for resetting the state of an implementing
   struct. It is often used in conjunction with
   the `Init` trait to reinitialize a component
   after a change in configuration.

7. **Suspend**: This trait provides a method
   `suspend` for temporarily disabling or
   deactivating an audio processing component. It
   is useful for conserving resources when
   a component is not in use.

8. **Process**: This trait provides a method
   `process` for processing a block of audio
   data. It defines the core processing
   functionality of an audio component and is
   implemented by various components like
   oscillators, effects, and filters.

9. **ProcessControl**: This trait provides
   a method `process_control` for processing
   control signals or events, such as MIDI
   messages or automation data. It is useful for
   components that need to respond to external
   input or changes in parameter values.

10. **AllowDisplay**: This trait provides a method
    `allow_display` that returns a boolean value,
    indicating whether the implementing struct
    should be displayed in the user interface. It
    helps manage the visibility of components in
    the synthesizer's UI.

These are just a few of the many traits found in
the `surge-traits` crate. They serve as building
blocks for various components in the Surge
synthesizer system, ensuring consistent behavior
and a unified interface for interacting with the
different parts of the system.

13> keep going! thanks!

I'm glad you found the previous list helpful! Here
are some more traits from the `surge-traits`
crate:

11. **LoadCoefficients**: This trait provides
    a method `load_coefficients` for loading
    filter coefficients into a filter
    component. It is useful for components that
    need to update their internal state based on
    filter settings or other parameters.

12. **UpdateDisplay**: This trait provides
    a method `update_display` for updating the
    display of an audio component in the user
    interface. Implementing this trait allows
    a component to update its visual
    representation based on internal state or
    parameter changes.

13. **SetBlocksize**: This trait provides a method
    `set_blocksize` for setting the block size of
    an audio processing component. It is useful
    for managing the buffer size used for audio
    processing in the Surge synthesizer system.

14. **SetPitch**: This trait provides a method
    `set_pitch` for setting the pitch of an audio
    component, such as an oscillator or
    a filter. It is useful for controlling the
    frequency of the component based on note or
    MIDI input.

15. **SetSamplerate**: This trait provides
    a method `set_samplerate` for setting the
    sample rate of an audio processing
    component. It is useful for ensuring that all
    components in the Surge synthesizer system
    operate at the same sample rate.

16. **StoreCoefficients**: This trait provides
    a method `store_coefficients` for storing
    filter coefficients from a filter
    component. It is useful for saving the current
    filter state or sharing filter settings
    between different components.

17. **PlotMagnitude**: This trait provides
    a method `plot_magnitude` for plotting the
    magnitude response of a filter or other audio
    processing component. It is useful for
    visualizing the frequency response of
    a component in the user interface.

18. **Redo**: This trait provides a method `redo`
    for reprocessing a block of audio data with
    the same settings as a previous `process`
    call. It is useful for components that need to
    reapply their processing, for example, after
    a change in internal state or parameters.

19. **GetRingout**: This trait provides a method
    `get_ringout` for retrieving the ringout state
    of an audio processing component. It is useful
    for managing the release and decay of
    a component's output when it is no longer
    receiving input.

20. **RingoutCounter**: This trait provides
    methods `ringout_counter_incr`,
    `ringout_counter_reset`, and
    `get_ringout_counter` for managing a counter
    related to the ringout state of an audio
    processing component. It helps keep track of
    the number of times a component has entered
    the ringout state.

These additional traits further demonstrate the
flexibility and modularity of the `surge-traits`
crate. By implementing these traits, various
components within the Surge synthesizer system can
be easily integrated and customized to create
a powerful and feature-rich synthesizer.
