# surgeosc-window

A window oscillator component for the Surge
synthesizer system.

---

`surgeosc-window` is a Rust crate that provides
a window oscillator component as a subcomponent of
the Surge synthesizer system. The window
oscillator is responsible for generating audio
signals based on a given waveform and various
control parameters. It supports multiple control
types, modulation, and different value types for
a flexible and powerful audio synthesis
experience.

The crate contains tokens that represent various
aspects of the oscillator's behavior, such as
control groups, value ranges, and processing
functions. Some of the tokens have mathematical
ideas associated with them, which are explained
below.

### Tokens and associated mathematical ideas

* `control_group`: A group of related control
  parameters.

* `control_type`: The type of control applied to
  the oscillator (e.g., frequency, amplitude).

* `default_value`: The default value for a control
  parameter.

* `max_value`: The maximum value for a control
  parameter.

* `min_value`: The minimum value for a control
  parameter.

* `modulateable`: Whether a control parameter can
  be modulated by external signals.

* `moverate`: The rate at which a control
  parameter changes (e.g., the frequency of an
  LFO).

* `snap`: Whether a control parameter should snap
  to specific values (e.g., quantization).

* `value_type`: The type of value used for
  a control parameter (e.g., integer, float).

* `get_size_mask`: Calculates the size mask for
  the oscillator, which is a bitwise mask used to
  determine the size of the waveform buffer.

  ```
  size_mask = 2^N - 1
  ```

  where `N` is the number of bits needed to
  represent the buffer size.

* `get_size_mask_win`: Similar to `get_size_mask`,
  but for the window buffer.

* `get_table`: Retrieves the waveform table for
  a specific control type.

* `get_wave`: Retrieves the waveform data for the
  oscillator.

* `get_win`: Retrieves the window data for the
  oscillator.

* `get_window`: Retrieves the window function used
  to shape the oscillator's output.

* `create_wetblock`: Creates a new wetblock, which
  is a buffer for storing the output of the
  oscillator before it's sent to the next
  processing stage.

* `process_sub_osc`: Processes a single
  sub-oscillator within the window oscillator.

* `block_update_mono_out`: Updates the
  oscillator's mono output buffer with new audio
  data.

* `block_update_stereo_out`: Updates the
  oscillator's stereo output buffer with new audio
  data.

* `process_sub_oscs`: Processes all the
  sub-oscillators within the window oscillator.

* `clear`: Clears the oscillator's audio buffers.

* `WindowOscillator`: The main struct representing
  the window oscillator.

* `set_pitch`: Sets the pitch of the
  oscillator. The frequency `f` is related to the
  pitch `p` by the following equation:

  ```
  f = 440 * 2^((p - 69) / 12)
  ```

  where `p` is in MIDI note numbers.

* `init`: Initializes the window oscillator.

* `get_formant_mul`: Retrieves the formant
  multiplier for the oscillator, which is used to
  scale the frequencies of the oscillator's
  harmonics.

* `process_block`: Processes a block of audio
  samples for the window oscillator.

* `SubOscProcessBlockCfg`: Configuration struct
  for processing a sub-oscillator block.

* `SubOscProcessCfg`: Configuration struct for
  processing a sub-oscillator.

* `process_oscillator_block`: Processes a block of
  audio samples for a single oscillator.

2> thanks -- what is a window oscillator?

A window oscillator is a type of audio oscillator
used in digital synthesis that combines multiple
waveforms or "windows" to generate complex and
evolving sounds. The basic concept is to take
segments (windows) of different waveforms and
blend them together in a controllable manner. This
allows the synthesis of a wide variety of sounds
by combining and modulating these windows in
real-time.

Window oscillators can be used in various
synthesis techniques, such as wavetable synthesis,
granular synthesis, or additive synthesis. In
wavetable synthesis, for example, a window
oscillator may be used to smoothly transition
between different waveforms stored in a table. By
modulating the window position or the window size,
new and interesting timbres can be created.

In the context of the `surgeosc-window` crate, the
window oscillator is a component of the Surge
synthesizer system that is responsible for
generating audio signals based on the chosen
waveform and various control parameters. It
supports multiple control types, modulation, and
different value types for a flexible and powerful
audio synthesis experience.

3> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/window.rs

The `WindowOscillator` struct represents the state
and configuration of a window oscillator in the
`surgeosc-window` crate. It contains various
fields that store the oscillator's properties and
configuration, as well as buffers for the
generated audio signals.

Here's a breakdown of the fields in the
`WindowOscillator` struct:

- `drift`: A field representing the frequency
  drift of the oscillator, which can be used to
  simulate the natural pitch instability found in
  analog oscillators.

- `master_osc`: A pointer to the master
  oscillator's buffer, which is used for frequency
  modulation (FM) purposes.

- `out`: An `OscillatorOut` struct that contains
  the output buffers for the oscillator's
  generated audio signals.

- `pos`, `sub_pos`, `ratio`, `table`,
  `formant_mul`: Arrays representing various
  oscillator parameters, such as position,
  sub-oscillator position, frequency ratio,
  waveform table index, and formant multiplier.

- `dispatch_delay`: An array representing the
  sample delay for each sub-oscillator before
  playback should start, allowing for per-sample
  scheduling.

- `gain`: A 2D array representing the gain for
  each sub-oscillator.

- `drift_lfo`: A 2D array representing the
  low-frequency oscillation (LFO) values for
  frequency drift.

- `fm_ratio`: A 2D array representing the
  frequency modulation ratios for each
  sub-oscillator.

- `params`: A `WindowOscillatorParamArrayRT`
  struct that contains the real-time parameters
  for the window oscillator.

- `osc_params`: An `OscillatorParamArrayRT` struct
  that contains the real-time parameters for the
  oscillator.

- `fm_depth`: An array representing the frequency
  modulation depth for each sub-oscillator.

- `out_attenuation`: A field representing the
  output attenuation of the oscillator.

- `detune_bias`, `detune_offset`: Fields
  representing detuning bias and offset, which can
  be used to control the detuning of
  sub-oscillators relative to the main oscillator.

- `active_sub_oscs`: An integer representing the
  number of active sub-oscillators.

- `window_wavetable`, `wave_wavetable`:
  `WaveTableBase<i16>` structs representing the
  wavetables for the window and the waveform,
  respectively.

- `tables`: A `TablesHandle` struct that provides
  access to shared wavetable data.

- `tuner`: A `TunerHandle` struct that provides
  access to the tuner, which is used to calculate
  the oscillator's frequency based on its pitch.

- `srunit`: A `SampleRateHandle` struct that
  provides access to the sample rate, which is
  used to convert frequency values to sample-based
  values.

The `WindowOscillator` struct also implements the
`SetPitch` trait, which allows setting the
oscillator's pitch. The `set_pitch` function
updates the active number of sub-oscillators to
1 when the `is_display` flag is set.

4> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/suboscs.rs

The `WindowOscillator` implementation contains the
`process_sub_oscs` function, which is responsible
for processing all the active sub-oscillators
within the window oscillator. The function takes
two boolean parameters: `stereo` and `fm`, which
indicate whether the oscillator should produce
stereo output and whether frequency modulation
(FM) should be applied.

Here's a step-by-step breakdown of what the
`process_sub_oscs` function does:

1. Retrieve the morph parameter value using
   `self.pvalf(WindowOscillatorParam::Morph)`. The
   morph parameter is used to control the blend
   between different waveforms or windows.

2. Call `self.get_table(morph)` to get the table
   index for the given morph value.

3. Retrieve the formant parameter value using
   `self.pvalf(WindowOscillatorParam::Formant)`,
   which is used to control the formant shaping of
   the oscillator's output. Then, call
   `self.get_formant_mul(formant as f64)` to
   calculate the formant multiplier.

4. Retrieve the size masks for the oscillator and
   window buffers using `self.get_size_mask()` and
   `self.get_size_mask_win()`, respectively. These
   masks are used to wrap the buffer indices
   during processing.

5. Call `self.get_window()` to get the current
   window function index.

6. Retrieve the number of active sub-oscillators
   using `self.active_sub_oscs as usize`.

7. Create a `SubOscProcessCfg` struct with the
   calculated values for table, formant
   multiplier, size masks, window index, and the
   input flags `stereo` and `fm`. This struct is
   used to configure the processing of each
   sub-oscillator.

8. Iterate over the active sub-oscillators in
   a loop, calling `self.process_sub_osc(so,
   &cfg)` for each one. This function processes
   each sub-oscillator individually, generating
   audio signals based on their configuration and
   the shared configuration passed in the `cfg`
   struct.

In summary, the `process_sub_oscs` function sets
up the configuration for processing the
sub-oscillators, iterates over the active
sub-oscillators, and processes them individually
to generate the audio output. The function is
designed to handle both mono and stereo output, as
well as applying frequency modulation if desired.

5> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/subosc.rs

The `process_sub_osc` function in the
`WindowOscillator` implementation processes
a single sub-oscillator with a given index `so`
and shared configuration `subosc_cfg`. The main
purpose of this function is to generate the audio
output for a single sub-oscillator based on its
specific configuration and the shared
configuration.

Here's a step-by-step breakdown of what the
`process_sub_osc` function does:

1. Extract the `table`, `formant_mul`, `window`,
   and `fm` fields from the `subosc_cfg` struct.

2. Retrieve the current position of the
   sub-oscillator in the waveform buffer.

3. Calculate the frequency ratio `ratio_a` for the
   sub-oscillator. If frequency modulation (FM) is
   enabled, `ratio_a` is set to the value from the
   `fm_ratio` array.

4. Calculate the indices `mipmap_a` and `mipmap_b`
   for selecting the appropriate mipmap levels in
   the window and waveform wavetables,
   respectively. These indices are used to adapt
   the wavetable resolution based on the frequency
   ratio and formant multiplier.

5. Get the pointers `wave_adr` and `win_adr` to
   the data in the waveform and window wavetables
   at the calculated mipmap levels and table
   indices.

6. Create a `SubOscProcessBlockCfg` struct with
   the calculated values for `ratio_a`,
   `mipmap_a`, `mipmap_b`, `wave_mipmap_idx`,
   `wave_adr`, and `win_adr`. This struct is used
   to configure the processing of the
   sub-oscillator in the subsequent loop.

7. Iterate over the audio block samples in
   a loop. For each sample, call the
   `self.process_oscillator_block` function, which
   processes a single block of the sub-oscillator
   using the current position, shared
   configuration, and sub-oscillator-specific
   configuration.

8. Update the position of the sub-oscillator in
   the waveform buffer.

In summary, the `process_sub_osc` function
calculates the necessary parameters for processing
a single sub-oscillator, gets the pointers to the
data in the wavetables, and iterates over the
audio block samples to generate the output. This
function is called by the `process_sub_oscs`
function for each active sub-oscillator in the
window oscillator.

6> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/scratch.rs

The `create_wetblock` function in the
`WindowOscillator` implementation is responsible
for converting a 128-bit integer input (`__m128i`)
into a `WetBlock1` structure with 4 floating-point
values. The main purpose of this function is to
preprocess the input data before it's used in the
oscillator processing.

Here's a step-by-step breakdown of what the
`create_wetblock` function does:

1. Create a mutable `WetBlock1` structure with
   4 elements, initialized to their default
   values.

2. Check if the code is compiled for macOS using
   the `cfg![macos]` macro. The implementation
   differs based on the target platform:

   - On macOS: Use `_mm_cvtsi128_si32` and
     `_mm_shuffle_epi32` SSE2 intrinsics to
     extract the 32-bit integer values from the
     input `__m128i` and convert them to
     `f32`. Store the converted values in the
     `wetblock.buf` array.

   - On other platforms: Use `_mm_store_si128`
     SSE2 intrinsic to store the input `__m128i`
     directly into the `wetblock.buf` array as
     128-bit integer data.

3. Calculate the sum of the 4 floating-point
   values in the `wetblock.buf` array and divide
   the sum by 2^13. Store the result back in the
   first element of the `wetblock.buf` array.

4. Return the `wetblock` structure containing the
   4 processed floating-point values.

In summary, the `create_wetblock` function takes
a 128-bit integer input and converts it into
a `WetBlock1` structure with 4 floating-point
values. The function uses platform-specific SSE2
intrinsics for efficient data conversion and
performs some preprocessing on the data before it
is used in the oscillator processing.

7> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/process_cfg.rs

These are custom data structures used in the
`WindowOscillator` implementation to represent
specific configurations for sub-oscillator
processing.

1. `WINDOW_OSCILLATOR_NUM_SUBOSCS`: This constant
   specifies the number of sub-oscillators in
   a window oscillator. In this case, the value is
   set to 2, meaning there are two sub-oscillators
   for each window oscillator.

2. `SubOscProcessCfg`: This structure holds the
   shared configuration for processing all
   sub-oscillators in the window oscillator. It
   includes the following fields:

   - `table`: The index of the wavetable to be
     used.

   - `formant_mul`: The formant multiplier, which
     affects the frequency content of the output
     waveform.

   - `size_mask`: A bitmask used to determine the
     size of the wavetable for the oscillator.

   - `size_mask_win`: A bitmask used to determine
     the size of the window wavetable.

   - `window`: The index of the window function to
     be used.

   - `stereo`: A boolean flag indicating whether
     the output should be in stereo or mono.

   - `fm`: A boolean flag indicating whether
     frequency modulation (FM) is enabled.

3. `SubOscProcessBlockCfg`: This structure holds
   the specific configuration for processing
   a single sub-oscillator. It is used in the
   `process_oscillator_block` function and
   includes the following fields:

   - `ratio_a`: The frequency ratio of the
     sub-oscillator, which determines its pitch.

   - `mipmap_a`: The mipmap index for selecting
     the appropriate resolution level in the
     window wavetable.

   - `mipmap_b`: The mipmap index for selecting
     the appropriate resolution level in the
     waveform wavetable.

   - `wave_mipmap_idx`: The index of the mipmap
     level in the waveform wavetable.

   - `wave_adr`: A pointer to the data in the
     waveform wavetable at the specified mipmap
     level and table index.

   - `win_adr`: A pointer to the data in the
     window wavetable at the specified mipmap
     level and table index.

These structures help organize the processing of
sub-oscillators within the
`WindowOscillator`. They store configuration data
that is either shared among all sub-oscillators or
specific to each sub-oscillator, allowing for
efficient and modular processing.

8> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/process_block.rs

The `process_oscillator_block` function is a part
of the `WindowOscillator` implementation. This
function processes a single block of samples for
a specific sub-oscillator. It takes the following
parameters:

- `so`: The index of the sub-oscillator being
  processed.

- `block_idx`: The index of the current sample
  block.

- `pos`: A mutable reference to the current
  position within the wavetable.

- `subosc_cfg`: A reference to the shared
  `SubOscProcessCfg` configuration for all
  sub-oscillators in the window oscillator.

- `subosc_block_cfg`: A reference to the specific
  `SubOscProcessBlockCfg` configuration for the
  current sub-oscillator.

The function first updates the current position in
the wavetable based on whether frequency
modulation (FM) is enabled or not. Then, it checks
if the current position is out of the valid window
wavetable range and, if necessary, updates the
formant multiplier and table index for the current
sub-oscillator and adjusts the position
accordingly.

Next, the function calculates the positions within
the window and waveform wavetables, taking into
account the mipmap levels for better performance
and memory usage.

Using the calculated positions, the function
fetches the window and waveform data by calling
`get_wave` and `get_win` functions, which return
SIMD vector types `__m128i`. Then, it converts the
SIMD vectors into intermediate "wet block"
representations with the `create_wetblock`
function.

Finally, depending on whether the output is stereo
or mono, the function calls either
`block_update_stereo_out` or
`block_update_mono_out` to update the output
buffer with the calculated data from the window
and waveform "wet blocks".

Overall, this function is responsible for
calculating the correct sample values for
a sub-oscillator at a specific block index,
considering the configuration data provided in
`subosc_cfg` and `subosc_block_cfg`.

9> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/process.rs

The `process_block` function is an implementation
of the `OscillatorProcess` trait for the
`WindowOscillator` struct. This function processes
a single block of audio samples for the entire
window oscillator, considering its configuration
provided by the `OscillatorProcessBlockCfg`
structure.

The function initializes some variables such as
`detune`, `fmstrength`, and then iterates through
all active sub-oscillators
(`self.active_sub_oscs`). For each sub-oscillator,
it calculates a frequency ratio based on the
provided pitch, drift, and detune. If frequency
modulation (FM) is enabled, the function also
adjusts the frequency ratio based on the input FM
signal, updating the `fm_ratio` for the current
sub-oscillator.

After processing all sub-oscillators, the function
calls `process_sub_oscs` to process the audio
output for each sub-oscillator and sum them up
into the final output.

Finally, the function scales and converts the
final output from integer values to floating-point
values. If stereo processing is enabled, the
function scales and converts both left and right
channels; otherwise, it only scales and converts
the left channel.

In summary, the `process_block` function is
responsible for processing a block of audio
samples for the entire window oscillator, taking
into account the provided configuration (pitch,
drift, stereo, and frequency modulation) and
updating the oscillator's internal state.

10> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/param.rs

The `WindowOscillatorParam` is an enumerated type
representing the parameters of the
`WindowOscillator`. The enum contains the
following parameters:

1. Morph: Controls the morphing between
   wavetables.

2. Formant: Controls the formant shifting of the
   oscillator.

3. Window: Determines the windowing function
   applied to the wavetable.

4. UniSpread: Controls the spread (detuning) of
   the unison voices.

5. UniCount: Determines the number of unison
   voices.

The `WindowOscillatorParam` enum implements the
`Param` trait, which provides methods to configure
the parameters. These methods include:

- control_group: Returns the control group to
  which the parameter belongs.

- snap: Indicates whether the parameter value
  should be snapped to the nearest integer.

- control_type: Returns the control type
  associated with the parameter.

- default_value: Returns the default value of the
  parameter.

- min_value: Returns the minimum allowed value for
  the parameter.

- max_value: Returns the maximum allowed value for
  the parameter.

- value_type: Returns the value type of the
  parameter (integer or float).

- moverate: Returns the rate at which the
  parameter value changes when moved.

- modulateable: Indicates whether the parameter
  can be modulated or not.

Additionally, the `WindowOscillatorParam` enum
provides a `new_runtime` method to create
a runtime instance of the parameters, which is an
array of `WindowOscillatorParamRT` elements. This
method initializes a new runtime array with the
respective runtime parameter objects.

11> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/init.rs

The `WindowOscillator` struct implements the
`Init` trait, which provides an `init`
method. This method initializes the
`WindowOscillator` with the necessary default
values and settings:

1. Clears the oscillator state by calling the
   `clear` method.

2. Sets the `active_sub_oscs` value based on the
   `UniCount` parameter, limited to the range
   between 1 and `WINDOW_OSCILLATOR_NUM_SUBOSCS
   - 1`.

3. Calculates the output attenuation based on the
   square root of the number of active sub
   oscillators.

4. Sets the `detune_bias`, `detune_offset`, and
   initial position and gain for each sub
   oscillator, depending on the number of active
   sub oscillators.

   - If there's only one active sub oscillator, it
     sets the gain to unity and the position to
     the start of the window wavetable.

   - If there are multiple active sub oscillators,
     it calculates the detune bias and offset, and
     then initializes the gain and position for
     each sub oscillator based on their index and
     a few other factors like panning and
     retriggering.

The initialization process takes into account
various settings and configurations of the
oscillator parameters to ensure that the
oscillator is set up correctly and ready for use.

12> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/formant.rs

The `WindowOscillator` struct has a method
`get_formant_mul` which takes a `formant`
parameter of type `f64` as input and returns an
`i32` value. The purpose of this method is to
calculate the formant multiplier based on the
input formant value and the characteristics of/
the window and wave wavetables. Here's how it
works:

1. Calculate the `formant_mul` value by converting
   the input `formant` value using the
   `n2p_tuningctr` method of the `tuner`
   object. Then, multiply the result by 65536 and
   cast it to an `i32`.

2. Calculate the difference in the number of
   samples per table between the window wavetable
   and the wave wavetable as a power of 2. This is
   done by subtracting the
   `num_samples_per_table_po2()` values of the two
   wavetables and storing the result as an `i32`.

3. Depending on whether the `window_vs_wave_po2`
   value is negative or not, the method shifts the
   `formant_mul` value either to the left (if
   negative) or to the right (if positive) by the
   absolute value of `window_vs_wave_po2`. The
   `maxi` function is used to ensure that the
   resulting value is at least 1.

The `get_formant_mul` method calculates a formant
multiplier value based on the input formant and
the characteristics of the window and wave
wavetables. This value is used in the oscillator's
processing to adjust the formant frequencies.

13> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/clear.rs

The `clear` method in the `WindowOscillator`
struct is used to reset its internal state. It
initializes all the arrays to their default
values, effectively clearing any previous
data. Here's what happens in the method:

1. The `pos` array is filled with zeros.
2. The `sub_pos` array is filled with zeros.
3. The `ratio` array is filled with zeros.
4. The `table` array is filled with zeros.
5. The `formant_mul` array is filled with zeros.
6. The `dispatch_delay` array is filled with zeros.
7. The `gain` array is filled with zeros.
8. The `drift_lfo` array is filled with 0.0.
9. The `fm_ratio` array is filled with zeros.

The `clear` method is generally called during the
initialization process or when resetting the
oscillator's state is necessary.

14> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/block_update.rs

The `block_update_mono_out` and
`block_update_stereo_out` methods in the
`WindowOscillator` struct are used to update the
oscillator's output in mono and stereo
configurations respectively, for a given block
index. They perform calculations based on the
input `WetBlock1` structs `i_win` and
`i_wave`. Here's a brief explanation of what each
method does:

1. `block_update_mono_out`:
   - Takes `block_idx`, `i_win`, and `i_wave` as
     input/ parameters.

   - Calculates the product of the first buffer
     elements of `i_win` and `i_wave`.

   - Shifts the resulting product right by 6 bits
     and casts it to `f32`.

   - Adds the result to the left output channel of
     the oscillator at the given `block_idx`.

2. `block_update_stereo_out`:
   - Takes `so`, `block_idx`, `i_win`, and
     `i_wave` as input parameters.

   - Calculates the product of the first buffer
     elements of `i_win` and `i_wave`.

   - Shifts the resulting product right by 7 bits
     and casts it to `i32`.

   - For both left and right output channels:

       - Multiplies the result by the
         corresponding gain value.

       - Shifts the product right by 6 bits and
         casts it to `f32`.

       - Adds the result to the output channel of
         the oscillator at the given `block_idx`.

These methods are used to update the oscillator's
output buffer based on the input waveforms and
their corresponding gains. They are typically
called during the processing loop when generating
audio output.

15> /file surge-rs/surgeosc-window/src/access.rs

The `WindowOscillator` implementation provided
here includes several methods to access various
components and perform specific tasks related to
the oscillator. Here's a brief explanation of what
each method does:

1. `get_table`:
   - Takes `morph` as an input parameter.

   - Calculates the table index based on the
     number of tables and the `morph` value.

   - Returns the limited table index within the
     valid range.

2. `get_size_mask`:
   - Returns the size mask for the wave wavetable
     based on the number of samples per table.

3. `get_size_mask_win`:
   - Returns the size mask for the window
     wavetable based on the number of samples per
     table.

4. `get_window`:
   - Gets the value of the
     `WindowOscillatorParam::Window` parameter and
     limits it to the range [0, 8].

   - Returns the limited value as an `i8`.

5. `get_wave`:
   - Takes `ms_pos`, `m_pos`, and `wave_adr` as
     input parameters.

   - Loads the appropriate values from memory
     using SIMD intrinsics (`__m128i`).

   - Performs a multiply and add operation on the
     loaded values and returns the result as
     `__m128i`.

6. `get_win`:
   - Takes `win_s_pos`, `win_pos`, and `win_adr`
     as input parameters.

   - Loads the appropriate values from memory
     using SIMD intrinsics (`__m128i`).

   - Performs a multiply and add operation on the
     loaded values and returns the result as
     `__m128i`.

These methods are used for accessing and
processing various components of the oscillator,
such as wavetables, windows, and other
parameters. They help in the overall functioning
of the oscillator and are used in the synthesis
process.

16> thanks -- what else can you teach me about
this system? could you summarize the most
important functionality in mathematical depth? how
can it be improved?

This system appears to be a part of an audio
synthesis system, specifically implementing an
oscillator called `WindowOscillator`. It seems to
be using wavetables for synthesis, which allows
efficient, high-quality sound generation. The
primary components of this oscillator are the
`wave_wavetable` and `window_wavetable`. Here's
a summary of the main functionality in
mathematical depth:

1. Initialization (`init`): Initializes the
   oscillator's parameters, including the number
   of active sub-oscillators, output attenuation,
   gain, and positions for each
   sub-oscillator. Detune bias and detune offset
   are also calculated during this step.

2. Formant Multiplier (`get_formant_mul`):
   Calculates the formant multiplier based on the
   given formant frequency. This involves tuning
   and adjusting the multiplier based on the
   wavetable sizes.

3. Clearing (`clear`): Resets the internal state
   of the oscillator, clearing all arrays and
   values associated with the current oscillator
   state.

4. Block Updates: Updates the output of the
   oscillator either in mono
   (`block_update_mono_out`) or stereo
   (`block_update_stereo_out`) mode. This involves
   calculating the output value by multiplying
   window and wave values and then adding them to
   the output buffer with appropriate gain
   adjustments.

5. Accessor Methods: Several accessor methods are
   provided for getting specific oscillator
   components, such as wavetables, windows, and
   size masks. Some of these methods also involve
   SIMD operations for efficient processing.

To improve this system, consider the following:

1. Optimizations: Investigate further SIMD
   optimizations to make the audio processing more
   efficient.

2. Parallelization: If the system runs on
   multicore hardware, consider parallelizing the
   processing of different sub-oscillators or
   separate audio blocks.

3. Higher-Order Interpolation: The system appears
   to be using linear interpolation. Implementing
   higher-order interpolation techniques, such as
   cubic or spline interpolation, can improve
   audio quality.

4. Adaptive Tuning: Implement an adaptive tuning
   mechanism that adjusts the oscillator's
   behavior based on the input signal or user
   interaction to enhance the audio synthesis
   process.

5. Additional Oscillator Features: Explore the
   implementation of more oscillator features,
   such as frequency modulation, amplitude
   modulation, or other synthesis techniques, to
   expand the system's capabilities.

Remember that the provided code is just a part of
a larger system. Identifying improvements and
optimizations may require a deeper understanding
of the entire audio synthesis system and its
specific use cases.

17> thanks.  what is the key algorithm by which
this oscillator produces its output signal?

The key algorithm used by this `WindowOscillator`
to produce its output signal is wavetable
synthesis. Wavetable synthesis generates audio by
using precomputed waveforms stored in tables
(wavetables) and reading through them at various
speeds to produce different frequencies.

In this specific implementation, there are two
wavetables involved: the `wave_wavetable` and the
`window_wavetable`. The oscillator generates
output by combining the values from these two
wavetables. Here's a step-by-step description of
the algorithm:

1. Initialize the oscillator and set up its
   parameters like the number of active
   sub-oscillators, detune values, and gain
   values.

2. For each sub-oscillator, read values from the
   `wave_wavetable` and `window_wavetable` based
   on the current position and the desired morph
   value (for wavetable selection).

3. Multiply the retrieved values from the
   `wave_wavetable` and `window_wavetable` to
   create an intermediate result.

4. Apply gain values specific to the
   sub-oscillator and channel (left or right) to
   the intermediate result.

5. Add the computed value from step 4 to the
   corresponding output buffer (left or right
   channel).

6. Update the position within the wavetables based
   on the oscillator's frequency and other factors
   like formant and pitch.

The process repeats for each sub-oscillator and
each audio sample in the output buffer. By
combining multiple sub-oscillators with different
gains, positions, and possibly detuning, the
`WindowOscillator` can produce a rich and complex
output signal.
